There are several ways to program artificial intelligence in the UE:
for example, you can describe all the logic of a character's behavior in a controller, but there is a more convenient way -
this is using behavior trees. Globally, it is a mathematical model, which is
a directed acyclic graph, the nodes of which are possible behaviors.
The UE has its own behavior tree editor that visually represents this
mathematical model. Let's start. Right-click in the content browser and
select behavior trree under the artificial intelligence category. We name the new asset BT_STUCharacter.
And add the second asset that we need. It is in the artificial intelligence category.
It is called Blackboard. We name the asset BB_STUCharacter. These two assets work in conjunction.
Now we will consider everything in detail with you. Open the behavior tree. Before us is a new editor Unreal Engine,
in which the logic of the character's behavior is configured. The behavior tree consists of nodes, the so-called
control nodes, and of leaves, which are tasks, that is, tasks that
describe the direct actions of the characters. We will consider everything one by one. Let's start.
So far, the only node in front of us is root, the entry point of our behavior tree.
We take out the arrow from our node. Release the mouse button. We are offered to choose one of the control nodes of the nodes.
These include selector, sequence, and simple parallel. We'll start with the sequence node.
This node provides sequential execution of several tasks. Select this node from the list.
In the same way, we pull the arrow out of this node and, in addition to the node nodes,
now we have the opportunity to select tasks. If we open this list, we will see the
tasks that are available in the UE by default. A little later, we will create our own tasks for our character.
For now, let's start with the simplest task called MoveTo.
This task is responsible for finding a path to a specific location. In fact, this is a different representation of the MoveAITo function,
which we already created in blueprints. In the details panel, the task has its own properties,
one of them is called the blackboard key, this property is of the blackboard key selector type and through
it the point in the world is determined, or the actor to which we want our character to start moving.
If we click anywhere on the graph, the details panel will open directly in the behavior tree.
We need to make sure that our blackboard asset, which we recently created with you, is set
in the property blackboard asset . The Behavior tree is the brain of our character: a set of rules, transitions and logical
states of our NPC. Blackboard is a database - a set of variables, the values ​​of which
we can change from different parts of our code, and the behavior tree will react to changes in these variables.
There is a large Add Key button in the upper left corner. We can add variables of various types.
Let's start with a vector variable. Name our key Location1 and create another
Vector variable named Location2. Let's make the logic of moving between the two given points.
Save asset. We return to the behavior tree. Select the MoveTo node and see that the Location1 key is automatically set in the blackboard key
, so when the behavior tree starts, our character will start moving to this point.
The sequence node executes tasks sequentially, so we can add one more task.
Let's choose Wait - this task does nothing, our character will stop
and wait for the number of seconds that we specify in the property for this node.
In the details panel, specify the wait time, for example, 2 seconds. We add the next task. It will also be MoveTo,
only now we change the key to Location2 and add wait to the fourth node, we will wait another two seconds.
We've created the simplest logic for our character. The behavior tree is executed from top to bottom and from left to right,
that is, first we move to location one, wait two seconds, to location 2, wait two seconds
and then the process will start again. Also, in the upper right corner of each node there is a number
that means priority execution. Another important feature is behavior trees, which
we will look at a little later. Task has an execution status: it completed successfully or not.
If it succeeds, it runs the next task. If execution fails,
then the entire sequence is aborted. Let's see how to run this behavior logic and also how to
set the location value to the blackboard variable. Go to the AI ​​Controller blueprint class.
The logic is still educational, so you can check the work in blueprints. Disable the AIMoveTo node.
And we call the AIController function called RunBehaviorTree.
We must pass the behavior tree as a parameter to this function. Therefore, we select our tree from the list.
Further. We need to get a pointer to the blackboard. To do this, the controller has a function
called GetBlackboard and returns a pointer to the asset.
We will not do a check for nullptr for blackbord, because we are sure that we have it installed.
The family of functions that allow you to set different values ​​for variables in the blackboard is called SetValueAs ..
Our Location variables need the SetValueAsVector function. Let's copy the location value from the AIMoveTo node.
Also, you need to pass the name of the key to this function, for this we will use the special MakeLiteralName node
to make a variable in the node and write Location1 in the field, that is, the name of our first key. Let's copy 3 nodes.
Change the variable name to Location2.
And let's define the second point to which our character will run. To do this, we'll
use the empty actor we created earlier. Copy and drag to another corner of the floor.
Copy the coordinates. We've all done minimal customization. Let's see what we got.
Also, if we leave behavior three open, we can see how the logic of the behavior tree is executed.
We start the game and the character ran from the current position to the Location1 point, after which the Wiat node starts.
He waits for two seconds and starts running to Location2.
They ran and stopped. We wait two seconds and ran to Location1.
Thus, it will move between the given two points. Naturally, this logic can also be written using the MoveAITo function
in the controller, but we will immediately switch to the behavior tree, because our logic will be
quite complex in the future. If you press an apostrophe on the keyboard, then debug
information appears that relates to artificial intelligence. Using the numeric keys on the num pad,
you can turn on / off various debug categories of artificial intelligence.
Also on the screen you can see the active task - what our NPC is currently doing.
This concludes the lesson. In the next, we will write our own task for the bot in C ++.
It is also possible to configure hotkey to show debug information. To do this, you need to
find the gameplay debugger category in the project settings and the topmost property - activation key is responsible for the key,
when pressed, the debug information will be called. You can change it if necessary.